# Finding community objective functions

This repository features the Matlab and Python scripts I created to apply Inverse Optimization techniques to try to find microbial community objectives.

As of now, all flux data used was synthetic (generated by Forward Optimization techniques using known metabolic models).

To run the MATLAB Scripts, MATLAB, the COBRA Toolbox and the Gurobi Optimizer are required. 

To run the Python Scripts (to create the (_L. plantarum_ and _A. muciniphila_) community model and generate the Pareto Front), the [MIMECO](https://github.com/Anna-cell/mimeco) library (_Lambert et al._, 2025), COBRApy and the Gurobi Optimizer are required, and it is thus recommended to create a python venv with these packages. The Gurobi License path in the code must be changed. 

invFBA and OVA were implemented as described by _Zhao et al._, 2016, but according to a matricized formulation described in the poster (to simplify the implementation while keeping it functional if multiple flux samples are used, although experiments with multiple flux samples were not yet tested), and with the optional addition of restraints to limit the flux objective values.

The _E. coli_ ec_iJO1366 model bounds were set similarly to _Zhao et al._, 2016.

The joint (_C. autoethanogenum_ and _C. kluyveri_) model and upper/lower bounds was obtained from _Scott et al., 2023_.

The _L. plantarum_ and _A. muciniphila_ models are featured in the MIMECO repo.


#### References:
-  Zhao, Q., Stettner, A. I., Reznik, E., Paschalidis, I. Ch., & Segrè, D. (2016). Mapping the landscape of metabolic goals of a cell. Genome Biology, 17(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-016-0968-2
- Lambert, A., Chaffron, S., & Eveillard, D. (2025). MIMEco: Multi-objective metabolic modeling to predict and explain pairwise interactions. bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.25.690486
- Scott Jr, W. T., Benito-Vaquerizo, S., Zimmermann, J., Bajić, D., Heinken, A., Suarez-Diez, M., & Schaap, P. J. (2023). A structured evaluation of genome-scale constraint-based modeling tools for microbial consortia. PLOS Computational Biology, 19(8), e1011363. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011363 

This project was developed in Instutito Superior Técnico and INESC-ID and constitutes my Biological Engineering Bachelor's Curriculum Integrating Project (PIC). Thank you, prof. Susana Vinga for your support along the project and prof. João Xavier for your suggestions on Optimization!